# Environmental impact and management of phosphogypsum

**Source**: 1. Environmental impact and management of phosphogypsum.pdf
**Pages**: 10

---

Review
Environmental impact and management of phosphogypsum
Hanan Tayibi a,*, Mohamed Choura b, Fe´lix A. Lo´pez a, Francisco J. Alguacil a, Aurora Lo´pez-Delgado a
a National Centre for Metallurgical Research (CENIM), CSIC, Avda. Gregorio del Amo 8, E-28040 Madrid, Spain
b National Engineering School, Sfax University, Sfax, Tunisia
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 24 July 2008
Received in revised form
13 February 2009
Accepted 7 March 2009
Available online 29 April 2009
Keywords:
Phosphogypsum
Waste management
Radioactivity
Building material
a b s t r a c t
The production of phosphoric acid from natural phosphate rock by the wet process gives rise to an
industrial by-product called phosphogypsum (PG). About 5 tons of PG are generated per ton of phos-
phoric acid production, and worldwide PG generation is estimated to be around 100–280 Mt per year.
This by-product is mostly disposed of without any treatment, usually by dumping in large stockpiles.
These are generally located in coastal areas close to phosphoric acid plants, where they occupy large land
areas and cause serious environmental damage. PG is mainly composed of gypsum but also contains
a high level of impurities such as phosphates, ﬂuorides and sulphates, naturally occurring radionuclides,
heavy metals, and other trace elements. All of this adds up to a negative environmental impact and many
restrictions on PG applications. Up to 15% of world PG production is used to make building materials, as
a soil amendment and as a set controller in the manufacture of Portland cement; uses that have been
banned in most countries. The USEPA has classiﬁed PG as a ‘‘Technologically Enhanced Naturally
Occurring Radioactive Material’’ (TENORM).
This work reviews the different environmental impacts associated with PG storage and disposal. The
methods described in the literature to minimise the negative effects of this waste are classiﬁed by
treatment type, i.e. physical, chemical, thermal, etc., and different suggested applications for PG are
detailed.
 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Phosphogypsum (PG) is a waste by-product from the processing
of phosphate rock by the ‘‘wet acid method’’ of fertiliser production,
which currently accounts for over 90% of phosphoric acid produc-
tion. World PG production is variously estimated to be around 100–
280 Mt per year (Yang et al., 2009; Parreira et al., 2003) and the
main producers of phosphate rock and phosphate fertilisers are
located in the USA, the former USSR, China, Africa and the Middle
East. The phosphate industry is also an important contributor to
national economies in many developing countries. The mineral-
ogical composition of phosphate ore, as described by various
researchers (Carbonell-Barrachina et al., 2002; Oliveira and Imbe-
rnon, 1998), is dominated by ﬂuorapatite [Ca10F2(PO4)6$CaCO3],
goethite and quartz, with minor amounts of Al-phosphates,
anatase, magnetite, monazite and barite. Heavy metals and trace
elements such as cadmium (Cd) and nickel (Ni) are also detected.
Phosphate ores are naturally highly radioactive and their radioac-
tivity originates mainly from 238U and 232Th.
In order to produce phosphoric acid, phosphate ore is processed
either by dry thermal or wet acid methods. The dry thermal
method produces element phosphorus using an electric arc
furnace. The wet chemical phosphoric acid treatment process, or
‘‘wet process’’, is widely used to produce phosphoric acid and
calcium sulphate – mainly in dihydrate form (CaSO4.2H2O) (Eq. (1)).
A general scheme of the processes is shown in Fig. 1.
Ca5FðPO4Þ3þ5H2SO4 þ 10H2O/3H3PO4 þ 5CaSO4$2H2O þ HF
(1)
The wet process is economic but generates a large amount of PG
(5 tons of PG per ton of phosphoric acid produced) (USEPA, 2002).
The nature and characteristics of the resulting PG are strongly
inﬂuenced by the phosphate ore composition and quality. PG is
mainly CaSO4.2H2O but also contains impurities such as H3PO4,
Ca(H2PO4)2.H2O, CaHPO4.2H2O and Ca3(PO4)2, residual acids, ﬂuo-
rides (NaF, Na2SiF6, Na3AlF6, Na3FeF6 and CaF2), sulphate ions, trace
metals (e.g. Cr, Cu, Zn and Cd), and organic matter as aliphatic
compounds of carbonic acids, amines and ketones, adhered to the
surface
of
the
gypsum
crystals
(Rutherford
et
al.,
1996).
* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ34 91 553 89 00; fax: þ34 91 534 74 25.
E-mail address: tayibi@cenim.csic.es (H. Tayibi).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Environmental Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jenvman
0301-4797/$ – see front matter  2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2009.03.007
Journal of Environmental Management 90 (2009) 2377–2386

Furthermore, wet processing causes the selective separation and
concentration of naturally occurring radium (Ra), uranium (U) and
thorium (Th): about 80% of 226Ra is concentrated in PG while nearly
86% of U and 70% of Th end up in the phosphoric acid. Determining
the types of impurities present can be very important when
deﬁning waste management processes and environmental policies.
Only 15% of world PG production is recycled as building mate-
rials, agricultural fertilisers or soil stabilisation amendments and as
set controller in the manufacture
of
Portland cement. The
remaining 85% is disposed of without any treatment. This by-
product is usually dumped in large stockpiles exposed to weath-
ering processes, occupying considerable land areas and causing
serious
environmental
damage
(chemical
and
radioactive
contamination), particularly in coastal regions. The USEPA has
classiﬁed PG as a ‘‘Technologically Enhanced Naturally Occurring
Radioactive Material’’ (TENORM).
This paper reviews the different environmental impacts asso-
ciated with PG storage and classiﬁes the methods described in the
literature for recycling and minimising the negative effects of this
waste.
2. Characterisation of phosphogypsum
PG properties are dependent upon the nature of the phosphate
ore used, the type of wet process employed, the plant operation
efﬁciency, the disposal method, and the age, location and depth of
the landﬁll or stack where the PG is dumped (Arman and Seals,
1990). PG is a powdery material that has little or no plasticity and is
composed mainly of calcium sulphate dihydrate (>90% gypsum)
and sodium ﬂuorosilicate (Na2SiF6) (Berish, 1990; Kacimi et al.,
2006). Due to the residual phosphoric, sulphuric and hydroﬂuoric
acids contained within the porous PG, it is considered an acidic by-
product (pH < 3). PG from ﬁlter cake usually has a free moisture
content of 25–30%. The vertical hydraulic conductivity of PG has
been reported to range between 1 103 and 2  105 cm/s (SENES,
1987). The free water content may vary greatly, depending on how
long the PG has been allowed to drain after stacking and on local
weather conditions. PG solubility is dependent upon its pH, and it is
highly soluble in saltwater (z4.1 g/l) (Guo et al., 2001). Its particle
density ranges between 2.27 and 2.40 g/cm3 (SENES, 1987) and its
bulk density between 0.9 and 1.7 g/cm3 (Vick, 1977; Keren and
Shainberg, 1981; May and Sweeney, 1984).
From a morphological point of view, PG has a predominant
particle size ranging between 0.250 and 0.045 mm in diameter
(May and Sweeney, 1984), depending on the source of the phos-
phate rock and the reactor conditions (Becker, 1989). Milos and
Dragan (2003), showed that PG has a marked crystal structure,
mostly of rhombic and hexagonal forms. Similar results can be
observed in the micrographs (Fig. 2) obtained in a morphological
study of PG samples from Tunisia (Tayibi et al., 2008) using Scan-
ning Electron Microscopy (Jeol Field Emission JSM6500F). The
micrographs reveal a homogeneous and prismatic PG piling
arrangement
and
a
well-deﬁned
crystalline
structure
with
a majority of rhombic and orthorhombic shaped crystals.
The chemical composition of PG from different sources is listed
in Table 1 (Taha and Seals, 1992). According to this data the main
components of the PG are CaO, sulphates (expressed as SO3), SiO2,
Al2O3, Fe2O3, P2O5, and F. Table 2 shows the trace metal contents
(arsenic, silver, barium, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury and
selenium) in (mg/kg) in some PG sources. These elements are on
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) list of potentially toxic
elements. One can see that the PG generally has a high total content
of Ag, Au, Cd, Se, Sr, some light rare earth elements, and Y. PG from
Central Florida has higher Sb and As contents than Alberta PG
(Idaho), but a lower concentration of Ag, Ba, Cd and Sr. Meanwhile,
Y, Zr, Cu, Ba and Ni levels are much higher in South African PG than
in Central Florida PG. Tunisian PG has been reported to contain very
high Cd, Hg and Zn levels (Rutherford et al., 1994; Choura, 2007).
With regard to radioactivity, as mentioned above PG contains
relatively high levels of U-series radionuclides naturally present in
the phosphate rock. Depending on the quality of the rock source, PG
can contain as much as 60 times the levels normally found prior to
processing. The most important source of PG radioactivity is
reported to be 226Ra (Rutherford et al., 1994). The data presented in
Phosphate Rock
Thermal Process
(Electric Arc Furnace) 
“Wet Process”
(Reaction with H2SO4)
Slag
Elemental
Phosphorus
Phosphogypsum
Elemental
Phosphorus
Phosphoric
Acid Scale 
Fertilizers
U238
Ra226
Pb210
Po210
Ra226
U238
Ra226
U238
Fig. 1. Scheme of the phosphate processes (USEPA, 1993).
Fig. 2. SEM images of PG at different magniﬁcations.
H. Tayibi et al. / Journal of Environmental Management 90 (2009) 2377–2386
2378

Table 3 shows that a wide variation of 226Ra activity concentrations
has been observed (from 15 to 1140 Bq/kg for Sweden and Florida-
USA, respectively), which can be attributed to the nature of the
phosphate rock, the depth of sampling, and some 226Ra migration
(Duen˜as et al., 2007). Some authors have also reported high 238U
and 210Po activity. 226Ra produces radon gas (222Rn), which has
a short half-life of 3.8 days, an intense radiation capacity, and
causes signiﬁcant damage to internal organs (USEPA, 2002). For this
reason the USEPA has classiﬁed PG as a ‘‘Technologically Enhanced
Naturally Occurring Radioactive Material’’ (TENORM) (USEPA,
2002) and PG exceeding 370 Bq/kg of radioactivity has been ban-
ned from all uses by the EPA since 1992.
3. Environmental impact
PG management is one of the most serious problems currently
faced by the phosphate industry. Only 15% of worldwide production
is recycled, while 85% is stored in the vicinity of factories in coastal
regions. The storage of PG without any prior treatment requires
large land areas and can cause serious environmental contamina-
tion of soils, water and the atmosphere. Negative atmospheric
impacts can be caused by the erosion of PG piles and the release of
highly polluting substances, due to the presence of hazardous
vapours
containing
heavy
metals,
sulphates,
ﬂuorosilicates,
hydrogen ﬂuorides (Szlauer et al., 1990) and phosphorus, cadmium
and 226Ra (Marovic and Sencar, 1995). Atmospheric agents can
transport the contamination to neighbouring areas.
3.1. Atmospheric contamination
Several studies have discussed the impact of PG radionuclides.
Bolivar et al. (2000), concluded that 90% of Po and Ra originally
present in phosphate rock remain in PG, whereas the remaining U
percentage is well below 20%. Thus the potential problem of PG
piles is the emanation of 222Rn from the alpha-decay of 226Ra,
a radionuclide classiﬁed by the USEPA as a Group A human
carcinogen, whose common presence in PG led to the regulation of
PG disposal under the National Emission Standards for Hazardous
Air Pollutants (NESHAP) and the National Emission Standards for
Radon Emission from PG Stacks (Federal Register, 1999). The EPA
ruling restricts PG exceeding 370 Bq/kg of 226Ra from being used on
agricultural soil. The maximum regulatory limit of 222Rn exhalation
(the ﬂux density of 222Rn gas entering the atmosphere from the
surface of a 226Ra-bearing material) established by the EPA (1998) is
0.74 Bq/m2/s.
According to Mas et al. (2006), PG stacks located on salt marshes
in Huelva (Spain) contain about 100 Mt of PG (area of approx.
1200 ha, with an average height of 5 m) and are generally not
completely watertight or even covered with any inert material,
leading to a local gamma radiation level between 5 and 38 times
the
normal
rate
(0.74 Bq/m2/s).
Measurements
by
CRIIRAD
(Chayeyron, 2007) of the equivalent dose to one square metre of
soil showed a result of 2–7 times the normal rate. In other words,
9 min exposure per day is equivalent to an accumulated dose of
Table 1
Major element composition en (%) for different PG source.
Component
Reference
CaO
SiO2
Al2O3
Fe2O3
MgO
SO3
Na2O
P2O5
F
Algeria
Kacimi et al., 2006
31.18
0.88
0.10
0.03
0.06
40.90
1.32
0.87
1.20
Egypt
Taher, 2007
32.13
8.78
0.29
0.35
0.09
37.60
–
1.82
0.80
India
Manjit and Mridul, 2005
31.09
0.29
0.54
1.31
43.21
0.29
0.47
0.86
Turkey
Degirmenci et al., 2007
32.04
3.44
0.88
0.32
–
44.67
0.13
0.50
0.79
China
Weiguo et al., 2007
30.79
1.88
2.10
–
0.8
42.56
–
Morocco
Sebbahi et al., 1997
30.5
9.5
2.8
0.9
0.3
42.9
–
0.5
0.15
Tunisia
Rouis and Bensalah, 1990; Choura, 2007
31–32
–
0.1
0.1
0.4
46
0.3
1.2
1.2
USA
Taha and Seals, 1992
25–31
3–18
0.1–0.3
0.2
–
55–58
–
0.5–4.0
Table 2
Content of some trace elements (mg Kg1) in different PG source.
Element
Floridaa
Idahob
South Africac
Tunisiand
Ag
<1
1–11
As
40
<1–2
Au (mg Kg1)
3–15
B
3
<10–30
Ba
7
20–140
140
Be
1
1–2
Br
1–2
Cd
7
9–28
40
Cl
<100–300
0.025
Co
2
<1–1
8
Cr
<10–70
20
Cu
8
10–42
103
6–11.5
Hg (mg Kg1)
<50
14,000
Mn
15
<2–10
6
Mo
16
<1–2
5
Ni
2
3–15
13
15
Pb
3–7
5
Rb
<10–20
Sb
100
0.3–0.8
Se
4–64
Sr
10
610–670
1100
Th
<1–1
2
U
6–13
V
19
10–40
Y
2
100–120
50
Zn
9
18–112
6
315
Zr
10
<10–110
185
a May and Sweeney, 1984.
b Luther et al., 1993.
c Malan, 1988.
d Rouis and Bensalah, 1990 and Choura, 2007.
Table 3
Radiochemical results of different types of PG samples analysed.
Radionuclides
(Bq/Kg)
Reference
PG rock origin
238U
226Ra
210Pb
210Po
230Th
Spain
Borrego
et al., 2007
Morocco
140
620
82
280
China
Burnett
et al., 1996
Keiyan
15
85
82
82
Indonesia
Burnett
et al., 1996
PT Petrokimia Gresik
43
473
480
450
India
Burnett
et al., 1996
Vadorado
60
510
490
420
Egypt
Burnett
et al., 1996
Nile Valley rock
100
445
Florida
Rutherford
et al., 1994
Central Florida
130
1140
1370
1030
113
Australia
Rutherford
et al., 1994
Numerous
10
500
Sweden
Rutherford
et al., 1994
Kola (USSR)
390
15
H. Tayibi et al. / Journal of Environmental Management 90 (2009) 2377–2386
2379

more than 10 mSv/year. This value is well above the recommended
worldwide exposure limit of z2.4 mSv/year (UNSCEAR Report,
2000), and may thus pose a health threat to workers on the site or
people living nearby (EURATOM Council Directive, 1996). In the
same region, Duen˜as et al. (2007), made measurements of 222Rn
exhalation over 24 h from active PG stacks and from restored and
unrestored inactive PG stacks, correlating the results with various
factors. The 222Rn exhalation of active PG stacks (0.523 Bq/m2/s)
was two times higher than that of unrestored inactive stacks, while
the 222Rn exhalation of restored PG stacks was eight times lower
than that of active stacks. It should be noted that all the recorded
values were lower than the aforementioned EPA limit value (EPA,
1998) and that the authors found a correlation between the exha-
lation value and the 226Ra activity concentration and soil porosity
and density.
Lysandrou et al. (2007), measured the 222Rn emanation rate of
PG samples dumped in a coastal area of Cyprus, placing them in
a sealed plastic container and monitoring radon activity growth as
a function of time for about 80 h. The 222Rn emanation rate ranged
from 0.35 to 1.1 Bq/h, which is higher than the geological back-
ground radon emanation rate in Cyprus. This could cause an
increase in radon levels and thereby generate excessive radiation
exposure for humans, in extreme cases reaching values of up to
17 mSv/year.
In Korea PG is generally used to manufacture boards for house
construction, thus exposing indoor occupants to a potential radio-
logical impact. Jang et al. (2005), estimated the 222Rn emanation
from PG boards and presented a mathematical model of the
emanation rate considering the back diffusion effect due to the
accumulation of 222Rn-laden air. Two types of PG board of different
thicknesses and Ra contents were considered: PG1 (2.2 cm and
259 Bq/kg) and PG2 (3.7 cm and 289 Bq/kg). Measurements were
made for times of up to 133 h and 144 h. The experimental 222Rn
emanation for PG1 was 78.07 Bq/m3 and the calculated value was
77.7 Bq/m3. With regard to PG2, the experimental 222Rn emanation
was 136.16 Bq/m3 and the calculated value was 139.12 Bq/m3.
3.2. Water and soil contaminations
Another matter of concern is the leachability of hazardous
elements from PG and thus the contamination of groundwater
underlying PG stacks (May and Sweeney, 1982, 1983; Carter and
Scheiner, 1992; Berish, 1990). Since PG waste is generally trans-
ported and disposed as an aqueous slurry, PG piles can be affected
by tidal variations and dissolution/leaching of the elements natu-
rally present in the PG can occur. Dissolved elements may be
deposited in nearby soils or transferred to waters and ﬁnally to
living beings (Reijnders, 2007). The international limit prescribed
by the European Atomic Commission (EURATOM) is 500 Bq/kg
(Sunil, 2002; EURATOM Council Directive, 1996). 226Ra leachability
from PG stockpiles has been evaluated by several researchers.
Haridasan et al. (2002), conducted leaching studies on PG
samples from Kochi, India, using distilled water (pH ¼ 6.0) and
rainwater (pH ¼ 5.0–5.8) as leachants in different contact time and
solid/liquid ratio conditions. The laboratory results indicated that
rainwater leached less 226Ra (0.09–0.28 Bq/l) than distilled water
(0.08–0.38 Bq/l). When PG was exposed to natural weather condi-
tions (rain) the maximum
226Ra activity in the leachate was
0.53 Bq/l while the minimum was 0.07 Bq/l. Most 226Ra values
determined in the leachates exceeded the limit value of 0.1 Bq/l
prescribed by the Bureau of Indian Drinking Water Standards.
Azouazi
et
al.
(2001),
investigated
226Ra
solubility
from
Moroccan PG in aqueous solution. The initial 226Ra activity in
phosphate rocks and PG was found to be around 1700 and 1420 Bq/
kg, respectively. The leaching study involved mixing 20 g of PG with
50 ml of distilled water for 20 h at various pH values (2.10–8.84).
The results showed an average 226Ra leaching rate of 26.4%, which
could be cut to 6% when the leached PG was previously calcined at
800 C. When the calcined PG was leached with acidiﬁed aqueous
solutions, HCl (4 N) or H3PO4 (22.1 N), no 226Ra was detected. The
analysis of a water sample from an area close to the phosphate mine
revealed the presence of 0.2 Bq/l of 226Ra, which is below the
radium chemical safety limit for water (1 Bq/l).
Burnett and Elzerman (2001), evaluated the migration of
radionuclides from Florida PG stacks. Sampling was carried out
through monitor wells in the surface aquifer close to PG stacks and
in older PG piles. It was deduced that the stack solutions were
characterised by a very low pH of 2.43  0.10, a high ionic strength,
and a high total dissolved solids content (w18,700 mg/kg), while the
aquifer water around the stacks had a lower average total dissolved
solids content (around 3300 mg/kg) and a pH value of 6.33  0.65,
comparable to the normal groundwater value in the area. From
a radiochemical point of view the stack solutions were more
enriched in 238U (10–17 Bq/l), 222Rn (300–1200 Bq/l) and 210Pb (7–
70 Bq/l) than the aquifer water. With regard to 226Ra, the speciﬁc
activity in the stack ﬂuid was low (0.1–0.2 Bq/l) but slightly higher
than normal groundwater values. Furthermore, most of the stack
solutions displayed lower 226Ra activity than the majority of the
measurements made around the PG stacks, which in no case
exceeded the USEPA
226Ra in drinking water standard value
(w0.2 Bq/l) (USEPA, 2000). However, in the case of U activity the
‘‘gross alpha’’ standard (w0.6 Bq/l) was exceeded. On the other
hand, modelling of the environmental radio-chemistry of U, Pb and
Ra showed that within the stacks these radionuclides were mainly
in the form of complexes with sulphate and phosphate, which are
relatively mobile uncharged or negatively charged solution species.
However, as the pH below the stack increased, the precipitation of
multi-component solid phases prevented the large-scale migration
of these radionuclides to the underlying aquifer.
The results of studies carried out by Bolivar et al. (2000), on the
aquatic environment of the estuary formed by the rivers Tinto and
Odiel (Huelva, Spain) indicated the presence of severe contamina-
tion by U-series radionuclides contained in PG stacks located close
to the estuary’s tidal prism. The average
210Po concentration
detected was 10  3 mBq/l, which greatly exceeds the normal
values found in uncontaminated estuarine waters (2 mBq/l). The
average 238U contents were 43  7 mBq/l and 38  3 mBq/l in low
and high tides, respectively, quite similar to the value of 40 mBq/l
obtained in uncontaminated sea water. Pe´rez-Lo´pez et al. (2007),
evaluated the mobility of metals from phosphate rock to PG and
later to the estuary. Their results showed that in general the studied
metals were efﬁciently transferred from the phosphate rock to the
PG waste as a mobile fraction, with an average transfer factor of
140  22%. The total mobile content of Cu and Ni from the phos-
phate rock and the U and Ni content from PG waste end up in the
bioavailable fraction. Furthermore, due to the exposure of PG to
weathering conditions, the efﬂuents resulting from leaching of this
waste may also present a high concentration of these metals. Taking
into account the total mass of PG (100 Mt), the water-soluble
metals released into the estuary were estimated to be: Ba (6509 t),
Zn (6726 t), Ni (232 t), Cu (1158 t), Cd (667 t) and Sr (54,219 t). This
means serious contamination, which can be extended a long way
around the coast by tide and wave action.
The leachability of Cd, Cu, U and Zn in Syrian PG was studied by
Al-Masri et al. (2004). Continuous and batch leaching experiments
using distilled water and dilute H2SO4 (0.1–1 mol/l) and sequential
leaching with distilled water and various selective extractants were
performed. The test samples were from 11 combined PG samples,
previously dried at 80 C for 24 h, sieved (555 mm sieve) and
homogenised. The prepared sample was then fractionated into 6
H. Tayibi et al. / Journal of Environmental Management 90 (2009) 2377–2386
2380

different particle sizes (45–555 mm) in order to determine as well
the effect of particle size on PG leachability. In the case of continuous
leaching for 60 min, the amount of Cu, Zn and Cd dissolved in
distilled water exceeded 50%, while only 20% of U was dissolved. The
leachate resulting from batch leaching experiments using distilled
water (varying the stirring time between 10 and 120 min) showed
that Zn, Cu, Cd and U were the most easily transferred elements in
the aqueous phase, with transfer percentages of 97, 68, 57 and 31%.
With regard to the sequential leaching of PG with concentrated
acids, the results showed that trace elements were dissolved in the
following order: U (31%), Cd (25%), Zn (10%), and Cu (10%). Increasing
the H2SO4 concentration resulted in an enhancement of U, Cd, Zn
and Cu solubility. With regard to the effect of particle size, ﬁne
particles (45–75 mm) yielded a relatively high solubility.
Lysandrou and Pashalidis (2008), studied the potential impact of
the solution composition (e.g. acidity and salinity) on U leachability
from PG stacks using de-ionised water and seawater. Samples were
taken from three areas with different acidity, salt contents and PG
ages. A1 and A2 were from aged and fresh PG respectively, while A3
was characterised by its high salinity originated by seawater. The U
concentration in the PG stacks was found to be 75, 30 and 40 Bq/kg
in A1, A2 and A3, respectively. The U concentration in the stack
solutions was 2, 81 and 282 mg/l, respectively. Furthermore, the
solubility of PG, particularly in terms of Ca and U leachability, was
enhanced by up to three orders of magnitude by increasing the
salinity, as a consequence of the effect of ionic strength on PG
solubility. Therefore a high U content was found in PG from A1
(75 Bq/kg), compared to 40 Bq/kg in PG from A3, where U is leached
by the seawater and consequently caused an important migration
of U to the adjacent sea.
4. Phosphogypsum treatment for different applications
In view of the aforementioned characteristics of PG (more than
95% is CaSO4.2H2O) and its attractive economic potential, and of
continuously increasing concerns about environmental pollution as
well, nowadays there is a great interest in using PG as an alternative
raw material for many applications. PG has been used in the cement
industry as a setting regulator in place of natural gypsum (Akın and
Yesim, 2004) and in the gypsum industry to make gypsum plaster.
PG also has been used as an agricultural fertiliser or for soil stabi-
lisation amendments (Papastefanou et al., 2006; Degirmenci et al.,
2007; Reijnders, 2007), and as a ﬂy ash–lime reaction activator with
wide application in the manufacturing of building materials
(Weiguo et al., 2007). The total use of PG in building materials is
probably well below 15% of the world PG production (Kelly et al.,
2002). In the United States this use was banned in 1990 (Federal
Register, 1990) and in the European Union it was discontinued in
1992. The presence of impurities has given rise to many restrictions
on the potential applications of PG. Studies have shown that
phosphates and ﬂuorides delay the setting time and reduce the
early strength development of cement, and has been found that
a relatively high level of ALF5 negatively affects several aspects of
gypsum crystal formation (Koopman, 2001). Thus, processes based
on washing, drying, and chemical and thermal extraction have been
recommended by numerous researchers to make use of PG.
The PG treatment methods described in the literature can be
classiﬁed as follows:
4.1. Methods involving chemical or physical treatment
In order to render PG harmless and suitable for later applica-
tions, researchers have proposed methods such as washing, wet
sieving, neutralisation with lime, and treatment with a mixture of
sulphuric acid and silica or hot aqueous ammonium sulphate
solutions.
Manjit et al. (1993) tested an aqueous ammonium hydroxide
solution (5–20%) to reduce phosphate and ﬂuoride contents in PG
before its use in the cement industry. Each sample was shaken with
different ammonium hydroxide concentrations (for 24 h at 35 C)
then ﬁltered, washed ﬁrstly with 0.5% ammonium hydroxide
solution and then with water, and ﬁnally dried at 42 C. The method
achieved a decrease in all types of impurities. In a follow-up work,
Manjit (2002) shook PG samples with 2–5% aqueous citric acid
solution instead of ammonium hydroxide solution for 15–25 min at
30 C. The impurities were removed as water-soluble compounds:
H3PO4, Na3(C6H5O7)2, HF, H3SiF6, H3AlF6 and H3FeF6. The optimum
aqueous citric acid solution concentration was 3–4%.
In further research by Manjit et al. (1996) another puriﬁcation
process based on wet sieving and hydrocyclone trials was investi-
gated. In the ﬁrst case, the PG sample was wet sieved through
a 300 mm sieve, washed and dried at 42 C. The results showed that
impurity concentrations were lower in the ﬁne fraction that passed
through the sieve (85%) than in the coarse fraction retained in
sieving (15%), dropping from 1.28 to 0.41% for P2O5, from 1.80 to
0.57% for ﬂuorides, and from 1.58 to 0.34% for organic matter. In the
case of hydrocyclone puriﬁcation treatment, PG was mixed with
water (in a proportion of 1:3 by volume) for 30, 50 and 65 min in
order to solubilise the impurities. Underﬂow (collected at the
bottom of the hydrocyclone) and overﬂow samples were collected
from the PG slurry and dried at 42 C. Comparatively to the over-
ﬂow samples, the underﬂow samples were characterised by high
pH values (5.8–6.0), a high SO3 content, and a lower level of P2O5,
ﬂuorides, organic matter and alkalis. These results are similar to
those obtained with wet sieving treatment.
The PG puriﬁcation process employed by Al-Jabbari et al. (1988),
consists of washing PG with water, sieving it through a 100 mm
sieve, and calcining it at different temperatures (low and high). In
order to improve the setting time and the compressive strength of
the resulting material, accelerators (such as calcium hydroxide)
were added to the calcined PG. The puriﬁed PG was chemically
analysed and physically tested. The results indicated that the best
and cheapest method of purifying PG was by washing with water,
sieving through a 100 mm sieve, and then neutralising with calcium
hydroxide.
Potgieter et al. (2003), studied the effect of chemical and
physical treatments of PG incorporated in clinker to obtain cement
with a SO3 content of 2.3%. Two PG samples (one dried directly at
50 C and the other washed with water for 10 min and then dried at
the same temperature) were subjected to different treatments
using acidic and basic additions (HCl, H2SO4 and NH4OH) during the
washing stage. The resulting PG was washed and dried at 45 C and
then interground with clinker. Reference samples were prepared
with natural gypsum. The results showed that except for the PG
treated with HCl, the initial and ﬁnal setting times were shorter for
cement with unwashed PG than with washed PG. The best setting
time reduction was obtained with sulphuric acid treatment (165
and 210 min for the initial and ﬁnal set, respectively). With regard
to mechanical strength, the unwashed PG achieved a slightly lower
strength than the washed PG, although the difference between the
various treatments was not signiﬁcant. Moreover, it seems that all
of the treatments resulted in an increase in the ﬁnal strength of the
cement. On the other hand, the physical treatments involved the
milling of different amounts of slaked and unslaked lime (between
1 and 2%) with PG for 15 and 30 min before being slurried in tap
water and subjected to ultrasonic vibration for 15–30 min. The
resulting treated PG was then mixed with the clinker to obtain
cement. The results showed that compared with natural gypsum
reference, the incorporation of unslaked lime in the cement
H. Tayibi et al. / Journal of Environmental Management 90 (2009) 2377–2386
2381

provided an increase in the setting times and decreased the
mechanical strength (except in the case of 1% unslaked lime).
Slaked lime had the reverse effect on cement behaviour, improving
its mechanical strength and providing acceptable setting times for
cement applications. In this case the best results were obtained by
adding 1.25% of slaked lime. The results obtained with ultrasoni-
cally treated PG were similar to those obtained with slaked lime,
and the short ultrasonic treatment time of 15 min was the most
appropriate.
Olmez and Erdem (1989), studied the removal of impurities
using several methods based on the neutralisation of water-soluble
impurities in PG with water and lime milk, the removal of P2O5
substituted in the gypsum crystal lattice, and a calcining process.
The puriﬁed PG was mixed with Portland cement instead of natural
gypsum and the prepared specimens were kept for 28 days at 20 C.
The treatment of PG samples by washing with tap water once and
twice at 20 C removed most water-soluble impurities, reducing
the amount of P2O5 from 1.02% to 0.84% and ﬂuoride from 0.79% to
0.61%. However this treatment cannot effectively reduce the ﬁnal
retarding action of the tested cement paste. The best results were
obtained when PG was washed with lime milk, due to the inacti-
vation of the all water-soluble impurities. The setting time of
cement pastes prepared with PG, heated at 140 C and 150 C for
30 min and then washed with lime milk were similar to the control
samples. For the same purpose, in another study Olmez and Yilmaz
(1988), washed PG in water or lime milk and then exposed it to
thermal treatments at 140–150 C for 30 min and at 130–150 C for
60 min to improve its chemical and physical properties. The results
showed that all water-soluble impurities can be removed by simple
washing treatment with water or lime milk, but the P2O5,
substituted in the PG crystal lattice, and other impurities cannot be
removed by the washing process and require thermal treatment.
To reduce the levels of metal salts, phosphates and radioactive
compounds, Kovler and Somin (2004), focused their work on the
use of a topochemical reaction with an unspeciﬁed agent, solubil-
ising phosphates and radioactive and other metal salts at temper-
atures between 140 and 350 C. They claimed that the
226Ra
content of PG can be decreased by a factor of 20–50% and the P2O5
content by a factor of 16–28%.
4.2. Methods including thermal treatments
The heat treatment of PG has been considered by several
authors and heat treated PG has been found to have fewer impu-
rities than the untreated material. Furthermore, the results show
that the heat treatment of PG not only allows the inertisation of
impurities but also the production of anhydrite which has a wide
application in the manufacturing of building materials and cement
industry.
4.2.1. Construction and building applications
Different authors have proposed different temperatures to
produce anhydrite. Manjit and Mridul (2000), developed the
production of stable, high strength anhydrite cement according to
USA Standards. PG was exposed to 500, 600, 700, 800, 900 and
1000 C for 4 h, and after cooling, the different anhydrites obtained
were grounded in a ball mill. X-ray diffraction and scanning elec-
tron microscopy studies indicated that the optimum temperature
to produce a stable anhydrite from PG waste was 1000 C. More-
over, data showed that anhydrite cement produced from PG has
lower energy requirements than other traditional building mate-
rials. The results of addition of several types of chemical activators,
such as sodium sulphate, ferrous sulphate, ammonium sulphate,
potassium sulphate, potassium dichromate, calcium chloride and
calcium hydroxide, showed that compressive strength improved in
all cases with curing time and mainly exceeded the USA Standard
limit value of 17 MPa at 28 days. The maximum compressive
strength (38.90 MPa) was obtained with the use of a mixture of
Na2SO4 and FeSO4 as activator (Zielinski and Cyrkiewicz, 1994). In
2005, Manjit and Mridul explained in further work based on the
results of the above study, how the anhydrite plaster produced by
heating PG at 1000 C for 4–5 h can be used to manufacture ﬂooring
tiles by mixing with catalysed monomers, glass ﬁbre, pigments, ﬂy
ash/red mud, etc. The anhydride was previously ﬁnely ground and
sieved through a 75 mm IS sieve and then mixed with sulphates,
chlorides and hydroxides of alkali and alkaline earth materials to
promote quick setting. The ﬂoor tiles obtained using the anhydrite
plaster were characterised by a ﬂexural and compressive strength
of 11–15 and 30–40 N/mm2, respectively. The water absorption
value was found to be between 2.0 and 3.5% and the wear resis-
tance between 2.0 and 4.0 mm. All these values were conforming to
Indian Standards.
Mridul et al. (1996), reported that a cementitious binder made
with calcined PG (hemihydrate), ﬂy ash and hydrated lime in
proportions of 40, 40 and 20% respectively, and cured for 28 days at
50 C can have different applications as a building material. In
contrast, the binder materials cured at 27 C exhibited higher
strength, better water resistance and low porosity, which is
attributed especially to the high amount of hydration products such
as ettringite and tobermorite. The durability test involved various
cycles of alternate wetting and drying on the one hand, and heating
and cooling on the other hand by increasing the temperature from
27 to 60 C. When the cementitious material was cured at 50 C,
contrarily to those cured at 27 C, a lower fall in strength and
weight loss was observed with the alternate wetting and drying
cycles. Moreover, in the case of alternate heating and cooling cycles
no strength variation or weight loss was noted.
On the other hand, studies have been focused on the develop-
ment of several applications of PG with cement, ﬂy ash and lime in
the construction industry. Min et al. (2008), studied the potential of
using calcined PG as an activator of ﬂy ash–lime binders to increase
early strength. PG used was heated at 135 C for 3 h and then
crushed in a roller mill for 8 min before being incorporated in
different proportions (0, 5, 8,10,12 and 15% by weight) to the ﬂy ash
and lime mixture. The specimens obtained were cured in two
conditions: some at room temperature and the others ﬁrstly at
45 C and 90% humidity for 12 h and then at room temperature. The
study showed that the specimens showed different behaviour
according to their curing conditions. In the case of the specimens
cured at room temperature, compressive strength was signiﬁcantly
improved by the incorporation of 8% calcined PG. Also, for the same
ﬂy ash content (75%) and an increasing PG content, the early
strength (1, 3 and 7 days) improved, while the late strength (after 7
days) decreased. The strengths at different ages of samples cured
ﬁrst at 45 C in 90% humidity were considerably improved. The
mineralogical study of the specimens with calcined PG conﬁrmed
the formation of ettringite and gypsum, which accelerated the
pozzolanic reaction of ﬂy ash and consequently greatly enhanced
the mechanical strength.
Sunil (2003), performed a perspective research on calcined PG–
ﬂy ash–lime hollow blocks as an alternative to conventional wall
bricks. The procedure involved ﬁrstly mixing calcined PG and ﬂy
ash in different weight proportions and then incorporating the
hydrated lime slurry to the mix. The study showed that the
compressive strength of the hollow blocks increased by extending
the curing time from 24 to 120 days. For a speciﬁc proportion of PG
(20–30%), the compressive strength improved when increasing the
amount of ﬂy ash, reaching a maximum value at a ﬂy ash content of
35–40%. Also, for the same proportion of ﬂy ash, when the PG
content was reduced from 30 to 20% the hollow blocks exhibited
H. Tayibi et al. / Journal of Environmental Management 90 (2009) 2377–2386
2382

lower strength. Concerning the durability of PG –ﬂy ash–lime
hollow blocks in sulphate environments, it was reported that they
have sufﬁcient strength for use as a construction material.
In research work carried out by Degirmenci (2008a), cementi-
tious binder specimens were composed of different percentages of
PG and ﬂy ash and 10% of hydrated lime. Two types of PG were
used: PG calcined at 150 C for 2 h, and PG air-dried and then sieved
through a 4.75 mm sieve (raw PG). The obtained specimens were
cured in two different conditions: water and air at 20 C for 28 days.
It was found that in both curing conditions an increase in the raw
PG percentage caused a reduction in compressive strength down to
the lowest value of 2.29 MPa for 50% raw PG. In contrast, the
addition of calcined PG improved compressive strength, with
a maximum value of 13.76 MPa obtained for 50% calcined PG for
both curing conditions. However, it was observed that in general
the specimens cured in water showed lower strengths than those
cured in air, with a pronounced effect in the case of raw PG. On the
other hand, the increase in PG content caused an increase in water
absorption; although the raw PG specimens showed higher values
(28–40%) than the calcined PG specimens (10–23%). Furthermore,
the specimens made of raw PG and cured in water exhibited
considerable expansion and crack formation, while negligible
expansion was observed when the specimens were cured in air.
Therefore, the calcined PG showed better mechanical behaviour,
lower water absorption and a lower unit weight, making it suitable
for building applications. Degirmenci (2008b) tested the stabilisa-
tion of adobe material, characterised by poor mechanical properties
and low resistance to moisture and water attack, with PG and
natural gypsum (NG) for building applications. The increasing PG
and NG rates (0, 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25%) applied to the adobe soil
resulted in a signiﬁcant enhancement of compressive strength at 28
days from 1.01 MPa for untreated adobe soil (0% PG) to a maximum
value of 4.34 MPa for 25% PG. All the strength values obtained were
considerably greater than the limit values required by standards.
Moreover, development of the adobe soil water resistance and
sample unit weight and the reduction of drying shrinkage were
found to be associated with increasing PG and NG contents.
Weiguo et al. (2007), studied the effect of incorporating PG in
a new type of lime–PG–ﬂy ash binder for a road base material
application to replace a lime–ﬂy ash binder characterised by low
early strength. The results showed that PG has a more pronounced
binder action than lime and promotes a rapid reaction between
lime and ﬂy ash. Therefore, lime–PG–ﬂy ash binders reached higher
strengths than those manufactured with only lime–ﬂy ash.
Compared to the mechanical behaviour of some other road base
materials such as cement soil, cement–lime soil, lime–ﬂy ash soil,
etc., the lime–PG–ﬂy ash binder showed the highest values for all
ages. These results were corroborated by the microscopy study
which, in the case of lime–PG–ﬂy ash, conﬁrmed the presence of
large
amounts
of
needle
like
crystals
(hydration
products)
surrounding the ﬂy ash particles and therefore enhancing the joins
between the different particles in the binder. No signiﬁcant
hydration products were observed in the case of the lime–ﬂy ash
binder.
Guo et al. (2001), produced PG-Class C ﬂy ash-Portland type II
cement composites for a marine application using dried PG. The
samples were cured at room temperature and 100% humidity for 2
weeks. The samples were then exposed to a tidal current in
a marine environment at a temperature of 16–31 C, salinity of 15–
26& and pH of 7.8–8.5. Other composites were subjected to
a dynamic leaching test with saltwater. In contrast to the control
samples, a stronger calcium carbonate coating embedded with ﬂy
ash particles was identiﬁed in both the immersed and leached
samples. This layer was found to be a product of chemical inter-
actions between the composites and the saltwater and resulting
from the precipitation of calcite on the block surface, encapsulating
the composites and increasing their survivability by covering the
more sulphate resistant surfaces. The results in this research indi-
cated that the 62%–35%–03% PG-Class C Fly ash-Portland type II
cement composite survived in saltwater for more than two years. It
was further concluded that the effective diffusion coefﬁcient is
a good indicator for the long-term survivability of stabilised PG-
Class C Fly ash-Portland type II cement composites. In contrast, the
reverse result was obtained when Kelly et al. (2002), investigated
the resistance in marine environments of composites made with
dried and sieved PG (passed through a 2 mm sieve), class C ﬂy ash
and dried lime instead of Portland type II cement. The results
obtained differ completely from those of the above research,
although the composite manufacturing conditions were very
similar. The composites immersed in saltwater exhibited surface
ruptures from the ﬁrst 3 weeks, allowing the intrusion of saltwater
and consequently an increase in PG dissolution and then the
formation of additional ettringite by multiple reactions between
the sulphate ions (from PG) and calcium aluminium oxides (from C
ﬂy ash), causing an erosion of the boundaries and severe degra-
dation. The percent diameter expansion ranged from 2.3 to 17%,
which exceeded the selected threshold and also the maximum
percent diametrical expansion of 1.8% determined when Portland
type II cement was used. The high active lime content (>3%) had
a negative effect on the composite behaviour, increasing their
percent diametrical expansion, promoting ruptures and neutralis-
ing the beneﬁt of any CaCO3. Therefore, the survivability potential
of the PG composites in the marine environment was negatively
affected because of the high development rate of ruptures
throughout the composites. And even if the calcium carbonate
coating was formed on their surfaces, it could not protect them
from saltwater intrusion. The PG-Class C Fly ash-lime composites
survived for only 15 weeks in marine conditions, while the PG-Class
C Fly ash-Portland type II cement composites survived for 2 years.
4.2.2. Cement industry applications
Other researchers have tested the effect of PG as a mineralizer
on the burning temperature of clinker and as a set controller in
Portland cement as well as its effect on cement properties and its
effect on cement setting and mechanical properties.
Mehta and Brady (1977) proposed to reduce the temperature of
clinker formation by adding and mixing the PG with the raw mix
before clinkering. Four types of cement were made: on one hand,
intergrinding PG and reagent gypsum with the raw mix to obtain
a clinker with 2% SO3 content, which was burning at 1285 C for 1 h
and then cooling by air. On the other hand, by grinding PG and the
reagent gypsum (control sample) added directly to the clinker. The
data indicated that cement prepared with the PG which was mixed
with the raw mix before clinkering required the lowest time of
milling (55 min), while the ones made by incorporating PG directly
to the clinker required 90 min. This conﬁrmed the negative effect of
the impurities on the grinding process. PG also used as mineralizer,
decreased the retarding effect from 155 min for the control sample
to 75 min and increased more than twice the early strength for 1
day from 8.1 MPa (control sample) up to 17.3 MPa, whereas after 28
days, the strength increase was only 8%. Moreover, the cement
made by incorporating PG before clinkering and in comparison
with that made by adding PG directly to cement plant clinker
allowed a very efﬁcient energy savings by reducing heat energy
required for the clinkering process as well as decreasing the power
consumed for the grinding operation. The positive effect of the PG
on the formation of clinker minerals by decreasing the thermal
energy consumption was also conﬁrmed by Mehta (1979). He
reported that the addition of 5% of calcined PG at 900 C to 90%
Portland cement in the presence of 5% silica fume improves the
H. Tayibi et al. / Journal of Environmental Management 90 (2009) 2377–2386
2383

hydraulic properties of cement as well as its mechanical properties
for up to 90 days. Valenti (1987), demonstrated the ﬂuxing and
mineralising properties of PG by analysing the behaviour of
mixtures of CaCO3, Al2O3 and CaSO4.2H2O (from PG and pure
gypsum) in stoichiometric ratio to synthesise 3CaO.3Al2O3.CaSO4 at
temperatures ranging from 950 to 1350 C and for times between
30 min and 10 h. It was found that the addition of PG to the
mixtures made it possible to decrease the unconverted lime
content and consequently the completed synthesis at a low burning
temperature, between 1050 and 1100 C within only 30 min.
However, the temperatures and times required by mixtures with
pure gypsum to complete the synthesis process were signiﬁcantly
higher (1350 C and 3 h) than those of PG.
The effectiveness of PG valorisation as a mineralizer in the
production of clinker Portland cement by improving the techno-
logical parameters of the clinker has been established by Kacimi
et al. (2006). Different PG percentages between 0 and 10% were
mixed with the raw material and heated for 30 min at a heating rate
of 30 C/min up to 1450 C to produce clinker. The incorporation of
PG resulted in an increase in the initial limestone decarbonation
temperature from 750 C for the clinker raw material without PG to
900 C. Furthermore, at this temperature it was observed that PG
had a mineralising effect on the decarbonation process, since the
mixtures containing a higher PG content presented a higher
amount of free lime. At 950 C, an adverse effect was observed due
to the catalytic effect of PG which accelerates the lime combination
process and the free lime content was more signiﬁcant in the
mixture with a lower PG content. When the heat temperature
reached 1000 C, the mixtures containing a higher amount of PG
showed the lowest free lime proportion, demonstrating that
decarbonation was completed. At low temperature (1150 C), alite
was formed and its content was associated with the amount of PG.
However, the clinker formation temperature decreased in relation
to the PG content. Therefore, PG-clinker with 10% PG contained
a higher alite percentage (56%) and a negligible free lime content
(0.4%), in spite of the low burning temperature of 1200 C, while
the ordinary clinker (control sample) contained 52% alite at
1470 C. In comparison with ordinary clinker, the PG-clinker was
characterised by a high SO3 content and the presence of small
crystals and a low amorphous phase. The grinding time was
decreased from 26 min for the ordinary clinker to 19 min for the
PG-clinker. Moreover, despite their lower early strength (2 days)
(10 MPa), mortars made by cement from PG-clinker exhibited
a higher long age strength which reached a value of 45.15 MPa at 28
days and exceeded the strength values of ordinary cement.
Taher
(2007),
attempted
to
make
PG
suitable
for
the
manufacturing of Portland slag cement. The process consists of
burning PG for 2 h in a mufﬂe furnace at 200, 400, 600 and 800 C
with a heating rate of 10 C/min. After calcining, PG is cooled,
crushed and ground in an agate mortar machine. It is then sieved
through a 90 mm sieve before being mixed and homogenised with
Portland cement clinker and blast furnace slag (previously crushed
and ground in the same way as the PG). The results obtained
indicated that increasing the temperature of the PG treatment
reduced the P2O5 and ﬂuorides content. Consequently the initial
and ﬁnal setting times of the pastes were decreased while their
mechanical strength was improved. So, the maximum compressive
strength value was attained with calcined PG at 800 C and its
microscopic study conﬁrmed the presence of a dense structure
with interlocking arrangements and a high degree of hydration.
Therefore, the hydraulic properties of Portland slag cement can be
effectively improved with the incorporation of 6% of thermally
calcined PG at 800 C.
Smadi et al. (1999), manufactured concrete using normal PG and
calcined PG at 170, 600, 750, 850 and 950 C for 3 h after washing
with water and unwashed. The concrete was prepared at a water/
cement ratio of 0.6 with different replacements of untreated PG and
calcined PG. The results showed that impurities present in the
untreated PG drastically delayed the setting time and reduced the
rate of early strength development of the cement to a greater extent
than pure gypsum. The amount of P2O5 in the washed samples
calcined at 170 C was 0.41% and decreased to 0.32% after
enhancing the calcining temperature up to 950 C. Increasing the
calcining temperature from 170 to 950 C also caused the ﬂuoride
content to decrease from 0.89% (170 C) to 0.27% at 950 C. By
increasing the calcining temperature from 170 to 950 C, no
signiﬁcant decrease in the P2O5 content was observed with the
unwashed samples, although the amount of ﬂuoride decreased
from 2.12 to 0.16%. It has also been found that the setting times
increased when using either uncalcined or calcined PG samples and
the ﬂexural strength improved with the use of thermally treated
PG.
Mun et al., 2007, investigated the effect of treating PG in acti-
vating waste lime-granulated blast furnace slag to manufacture
Non-Sintering Cement (NSC). The PG treatment process involved
washing with 0.5% lime milk at 20 C for 5 min at PG/lime milk ratio
of 14% by weight and then drying at 80 C. The dehydrate PG
obtained was calcined at 450 C in order to obtain the anhydrite.
The effect of the dehydrate PG and the anhydrite on the mortar
behaviour was different. Generally, as the amount of dehydrate PG
was increased, both the setting time and compressive strength
tended to be enhanced up to a dehydrate content of 17%. However,
in the case of increasing the anhydrite content, the setting time
decreased while the compressive strength tended to increase up to
a limit anhydrite content of 12%. Thus the optimum amount of
dehydrate PG and anhydrite required were found to be 17.5% and
12% respectively. The ettringite and calcium-silicate-hydrates are
the major hydration products. The largest amount of ettringite was
formed in the early ages and its early age hydration was affected by
the pH. However, the strength gain at later ages and its hydration
was attributed to the formation of calcium-silicate-hydrates.
5. Conclusions
The use of PG poses unsolvable and troublesome problems.
Environmental concerns are related with the large stockpiles of PG
and their negative impact on surrounding land, water and air. More
than 85% of all PG generated each year is dumped on land or at the
sea. Data from the reviewed studies underline the impact of certain
chemical parameters related with PG stacks. Research on impurity
removal and on pollutant concentrations linked with PG stacks
could allow PG to be used more effectively. Furthermore, PG recy-
cling is not only an engineering or scientiﬁc problem, but also an
economic and political concern.
In recent years new disposal facilities are being designed and
constructed and existing facilities are being retroﬁtted to meet
stricter environmental standards that enable on-land PG disposal
to be achieved in an environmentally sound manner. Furthermore,
considerable research focused on ﬁnding commercial uses for PG
has been carried out, although much more needs to be done in the
future. A cut in fertiliser consumption would obviously help to
avoid continuously mounting PG stockpiles, but it would also mean
hard changes in farming methods in developed countries, and
especially in developing countries who defend their right to the
same lifestyle as developed countries.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to AECI (project N A/5537/06) and to
the Spanish National R&D&I Plan (Project CTQ2008-02012/PPQ) for
H. Tayibi et al. / Journal of Environmental Management 90 (2009) 2377–2386
2384

the ﬁnancial support of this study. Hanan Tayibi is grateful to the
CSIC (Spanish National Research Council) for an I3P contract
(I3PDR-6-01).
References
Akın, A.I., Yesim, S., 2004. Utilization of weathered phosphogypsum as set retarder
in Portland cement. Cement and Concrete Research 34 (4), 677–680.
Al-Jabbari, S., Faisal, F., Ali, S., Nasir, S., 1988. Journal of Building Research, Scientiﬁc
Research Council, Baghdad 7, 49.
Al-Masri, M.S., Amin, Y., Ibrahim, S., Al-Bich, F., 2004. Distribution of some trace
metals in Syrian phosphogypsum. Applied Geochemistry 19, 747–753.
Arman, A., Seals, R.K., 1990. A preliminary assessment of utilization alternatives for
phosphogypsum. Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Phos-
phogypsum, Orlando, FL, FIPR Pu. No. 01-060-083; 2, 562–575.
Azouazi, M., Ouahibi, Y., Fakhi, S., Andres, Y., Abee, J.C.H., Benmansour, M., 2001.
Natural radioactivity in phosphates, phosphogypsum and natural waters in
Morocco. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 54, 231–242.
Becker, P., 1989. Phosphates and phosphoric acid: raw materials, technology, and
economics of the wet process. Fertilizer Science and Technology Series, second
ed., 6, pp 752.
Berish, C.W., 1990. Potential environmental hazards of phosphogypsum storage in
central Florida. In: Proceedings of the third international symposium on
phosphogypsum, Orlando, FL, FIPR Pub. No. 01060083; 2, 1–29.
Bolivar, J.P., Garcia-Tenorio, R., Vaca, F., 2000. Radioecological study of an estuarine
system located in the south of Spain. Water Research 34, 2941–2950.
Borrego, E., Mas, J.L., Martı´n, J.E., Bolı´var, J.P., Vaca, F., Aguado, J.L., 2007. Radioac-
tivity levels in aerosol particles surrounding a large TENORM waste repository
after application of preliminary restoration work. Science of the Total Envi-
ronment 377 (1), 27–35.
Burnett, W.C., Elzerman, A.W., 2001. Nuclide migration and the environmental
radiochemistry of Florida phosphogypsum. Journal of Environmental Radioac-
tivity 54, 27–51.
Burnett, W.C., Schultz, M.K., Carter, D.H., 1996. Radionuclide ﬂow during the
conversion of phosphogypsum to ammonium sulfate. Journal of Environmental
Radioactivity 32 (1–2), 33–51.
Carbonell-Barrachina, A., DeLaune, R.D., Jugsujinda, A., 2002. Phosphogypsum
chemistry under highly anoxic conditions. Waste Management 22 (6), 657–665.
Carter, O.C., Scheiner, B.J., 1992. Investigation of metal and non-metal migration
through
phosphogypsum.
In:
Richardson,
P.E.,
El-Shall,
H.
(Eds.),
AIME
Proceedings on the Symposium on Emerging process Technologies for a Cleaner
Environment, pp. 205–210.
Chayeyron, B., 2007. Informe CRIIRAD N 07-117 Huelva (fosfoyesos y vertido
Cs137). Control Radiolo´gico de las balsas de fosfoyesos y del vertido de Cs-137
del CRI-9. Noviembre, pp 36.
Choura, M., 2007. Short and medium action program III-Tunisia: Environmental
evaluation of the treatment of phosphate in the south coastal zone of Sfax.
Municipally of Sfax, Internal report, Tunisia.
Degirmenci, N., Okucu, A., Turabi, A., 2007. Application of phosphogypsum in soil
stabilization. Building and Environment 42 (9), 3393–3398.
Degirmenci, N., 2008a. Utilisation of phosphogypsum as raw and calcined material
in manufacturing of building products. Construction and Building Materials 22,
1857–1862.
Degirmenci, N., 2008b. The using of waste phosphogypsum and natural gypsum in
adobe stabilization. Construction and Building Materials 22, 1220–1224.
Duen˜as, C., Liger, E., Can˜ete, S., Pe´rez, M., Bolı´var, J.P., 2007. Exhalation of 222Rn from
phosphogypsum piles located at the Southwest of Spain. Journal of Environ-
mental Radioactivity 95, 63–74.
EPA, 1998. Code of Federal Regulations, 1998. Title 40, vol. 7, Parts 61.202 and 61.204
(40CFR61.202 and 40CFR61.204).
EURATOM Council Directive 96/26 EC, 1996.
Federal Register, Vol. 64, N. 2, 40 CFR Part 61, Subpart 61, 3 February 1999, pp
5573–5580.
Federal Register 13480. April 10, 1990.
Guo, T., Malone, R.F., Rusch, K., 2001. Stabilized phosphogypsum: Class C ﬂy ash:
Portland II cement composites for potential marine applications. Environmental
Science and Technology 35, 3967–3973.
Haridasan, P.P., Maniyan, C.G., Pillai, P.M.B., Khan, A.H., 2002. Dissolution charac-
teristics of 226Ra from phosphogypsum. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity
62, 287–294.
Jang, M., Kang, C.S., Moon, J.H., 2005. Estimation of 222Rn release from the phos-
phogypsum board used in housing panels. Journal of Environmental Radioac-
tivity 80, 153–160.
Kacimi, L., Simon-Masseron, A., Ghomari, A., Derriche, Z., 2006. Reduction of clin-
kerization temperature by using phosphogypsum. Journal of Hazardous Mate-
rials 137 (1), 129–137.
Kelly, A.R., Tingzong, G., Roger, K.S., 2002. Stabilization of phosphogypsum using
class C ﬂy ash and lime: assessment of the potential for marine applications.
Journal of Hazardous Materials 93 (2), 167–186.
Keren, R., Shainberg, I., 1981. Effect of dissolution rate on the efﬁciency of industrial
and mined gypsum in improving inﬁltration of a sodic soil. Soil Science Society
of America Journal 45, 103–107.
Koopman, C., 2001. Puriﬁcation of gypsum from the phosphoric acid production by
recrystallization with simultaneous extraction. PhD thesis, TU, Delf, 2001.
Kovler, K., Somin, M., 2004. Producing Environment-conscious Building Materials
from Contaminated Phosphogypsum. Technion, Haifa, Israel.
Luther, S.M., Dudas, M.J., Rutherford, P.M., 1993. Radioactivity and chemical char-
acteristics of Alberta phosphogypsum. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 69, 277–290.
Lysandrou, M., Pashalidis, I., 2008. Uranium chemistry in stack solutions and
leachates phophogypsum disposed at a coastal area in Cyprus. Journal of
Environmental Radioactivity 99, 359–366.
Lysandrou, M., Charalambides, A., Pashalidis, I., 2007. Radon emanation from
phosphogypsum and related mineral samples in Cyprus. Radiation Measure-
ments 42, 1583–1585.
Malan, J.J., 1988. Utilization of phosphogypsum: structure and achievements of the
Second International Symposium on Phosphogypsum, Miami, FL.FIPR Pub. No.
01-037-055; 1, 131–139.
Manjit, S., Mridul, G., 2005. Study on anhydrite plaster from waste phosphogypsum
for use in polymerised ﬂooring composition. Construction and Building Mate-
rials 19 (1), 25–29.
Manjit, S., 2002. Treating waste phosphogypsum for cement and plaster manu-
facture. Cement and Concrete Research 32 (7), 1033–1038.
Manjit, S., Mridul, G., 2000. Making of anhydrite cement from waste gypsum.
Cement and Concrete Research 30 (4), 571–577.
Manjit, S., Mridul, G., Verma, C.L., Handa, S.K., Rakesh, K., 1996. An improved process
for the puriﬁcation of phosphogypsum. Construction and Building Materials 10
(8), 597–600.
Manjit, S., Garg, M., Rehsi, S.S., 1993. Purifying phosphogypsum for cement
manufacture. Construction and Building Materials 7 (1), 3–7.
Marovic, G., Sencar, J.J., 1995. 226Ra and possible water contamination due to
phosphate
fertilizer
production.
Journal
of
Radioanalytical
and
Nuclear
Chemistry 200 (1), 9–18.
Mas, J.L., San Miguel, E.G., Bolı´var, J.P., Vaca, F., Pe´rez-Moreno, J.P., 2006. An assay on
the effect of preliminary restoration tasks applied to a large TENORM wastes
disposal in the south-west of Spain. Science of the Total Environment 364, 55–66.
May, A., Sweeney, J.W., 1984. Assessment of environmental impacts associated with
phosphogypsum in Florida. In: Kuntze, R.A. (Ed.), The Chemistry and Tech-
nology of Gypsum. ASTM Special Technical Publication No. 861, pp. 116–139.
May, A., Sweeney, J.W., 1983. Evaluation of Radium and Toxic Element Leaching
Characteristics of Florida Phosphogypsum Stockpiles. U.S. Bureau of Mines.
Report No. 8776, 1–19.
May, A., Sweeney, J.W., 1982. Assessment of Environmental Impacts Associated with
Phosphogypsum in Florida. U.S. Bureau of Mines. Report No. 8639, 1–19.
Mehta, P.K., 1979. Modiﬁed Portland cements for saving energy. Energy and
resources conservation in concrete technology, U.S. Japan Cooperative Science
Program, Tokyo.
Mehta, P.K., Brady, J.R., 1977. Utilization of phosphogypsum in Portland cement
industry. Cement and Concrete Research 7 (5), 537–544.
Milos, B.R., Dragan, V.T., 2003. Phosphogypsum surface characterisation using
scanning electron microscopy. Acta Periodica Technologica 34, 61–70.
Min, Y., Jueshi, Q., Ying, P., 2008. Activation of ﬂy ash-lime systems using calcined
phosphogypsum. Construction and Building Materials 22, 1004–1008.
Mridul, G., Manjit, S., Rakesh, K., 1996. Some aspects of the durability of a phos-
phogypsum-lime-ﬂy ash binder. Construction and Building Materials 10 (4),
273–279.
Mun, K.J., Hyoung, W.K., Lee, C.W., So, S.Y., Soh, Y.S., 2007. Basic properties of non-
sintering
cement
using
phosphogypsum
and
waste
lime
as
activator.
Construction and Building Materials 21 (6), 1342–1350.
Oliveira, S.M.B., Imbernon, R.A., 1998. Weathering alteration and related REE
concentration in the Catala˜o I carbonatite complex, central Brazil. Journal of
South American Earth Sciences 11 (4), 379–388.
Olmez, H., Erdem, E., 1989. The effect of phosphogypsum on the setting and
mechanical properties of Portland cement and trass cement. Cement and
Concrete Research 19, 337–384.
Olmez, H., Yilmaz, V.T., 1988. Infrared study on the reﬁnement of phosphogypsum
for cements. Cement and Concrete Research. 18, 449–454.
Papastefanou, C., Stoulos, S., Ioannidou, A., Manolopoulou, M., 2006. The application
of phosphogypsum in agriculture and the radiological impact. Journal of
Environmental Radioactivity 89 (2), 188–198.
Parreira, A.B., Kobayashi Jr., A.R.K., Silvestre, O.B., 2003. Inﬂuence of Portland cement
type on unconﬁned compressive strength and linear expansion of cement-
stabilized phosphogypsum. Journal of Environmental Engineering 129, 956–960.
Pe´rez-Lo´pez, R., A´ lvarez-Valero, A.M., Nieto, J.M., 2007. Changes in mobility of toxic
elements during the production of phosphoric acid in the fertilizer industry of
Huelva (SW Spain) and environmental impact of phosphogypsum wastes.
Journal of Hazardous Materials 148, 745–750.
Potgieter, J.H., Potgieter, S.S., McCrindle, R.I., Strydom, C.A., 2003. An investigation
into the effect of various chemical and physical treatments of a South African
phosphogypsum to render it suitable as a set retarder for cement. Cement and
Concrete Research 33 (8), 1223–1227.
Reijnders, L., 2007. Cleaner phosphogypsum, coal combustion ashes and waste
incineration ashes for application in building materials, A review. Building and
Environment 42 (2), 1036–1042.
Rouis, M.J., Bensalah, A., 1990. Phosphogypsum management in Tunisia: environ-
mental problems and required solutions. In: Proceedings of the Third Interna-
tional Symposium on Phosphogypsum, Orlando, FL, FIPR Pub. No. 01-060-083;
1, 87–105.
H. Tayibi et al. / Journal of Environmental Management 90 (2009) 2377–2386
2385

Rutherford, P.M., Dudas, M.J., Arocena, J.M., 1996. Heterogeneous distribution of
radionuclides, barium and strontium in phosphogypsum by-product. Science of
the Total Environment 180 (3), 201–209.
Rutherford, P.M., Dudas, M.J., Samek, R.A., 1994. Environmental impacts of phos-
phogypsum. The Science of the Total Environment 149 (1–2), 1–38.
Sebbahi, T.S., Ould-Chameikh, M.L., Sahban, F., Aride, J., Benarafa, L., Belkbir, L., 1997.
Thermal behaviour of Moroccan phosphogypsum. Thermochimica Acta 302 (1–
2), 69–75.
SENES Consultants Limited, 1987. An analysis of the major environmental and
health concerns of phosphogypsum tailings in Canada and methods for their
reduction. The Ontario Ministry of the Environment, Alberta Environment,
Canada.
Smadi, M.M., Haddad, R.H., Akour, A.M., 1999. Potential use of phosphogypsum in
concrete. Cement and Concrete Research 29 (9), 1419–1425.
Sunil, K., 2003. Fly ash–lime–phosphogypsum hollow blocks for walls and parti-
tions. Building and Environment 38 (2), 291–295.
Sunil, K., 2002. A perspective study on ﬂy ash–lime–gypsum bricks and hollow
blocks for low cost housing development. Construction and Building Materials
16 (8), 519–525.
Szlauer, B., Szwanenfeld, M., Jakubiec, H.W., Kolasa, K., 1990. Hydrobiological
characteristics of ponds collecting efﬂuents from a phosphogypsum tip of the
police chemical works near Szczecin. Acta Hydrobiologica 32, 27–34.
Taha, R., Seals, R.K., 1992. Engineering properties and potential uses of by product
phosphogypsum. In: Proceedings of Utilization of Waste Materials in Civil
Engineering Construction. American Society of Civil Engineering, New York, NY.
Taher, M.A., 2007. Inﬂuence of thermally treated phosphogypsum on the prop-
erties of Portland slag cement. Resources, Conservation and Recycling 52 (1),
28–38.
Tayibi, H., Pe´rez, C., Lo´pez, F.A., Choura, M., Lo´ pez-Delgado, A., 2008. A Phospho-
gypsum Stabilization Process using a Sulphur Polymer Matrix. International
Congress of Solid Waste Management & Sustainable Development, Hammamet
(Tunisia).
USEPA, 2002. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2002. National Emission
Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants, Subpart R.
USEPA, 2000. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2000. National Primary
Drinking
Water
Regulations;
Radionuclides;
Notice
of
Data
Availability;
Proposed Rule: Washington, D.C., Ofﬁce of Water, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency Report EPA-815-2-00-003.
USEPA, 1993. Diffuse NORM Wastes-Waste characterization and Preliminary Risk
Assessment. Prepared by S. Cohen and Associates, Inc.,and Rogers & Associates
Engineering Corp., for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Ofﬁce of
Radiation and Indoor Air.
UNSCEAR, 2000. United Nations Scientiﬁc Committee on the Effect of Atomic
Radiation. Exposure from Natural Radiation Sources. United Nations, New York.
Valenti, G., 1987. High-temperature synthesis of calcium sulphoaluminate from
phosphogypsum. Thermochimica Acta 113, 269–275.
Vick, S.G., 1977. Rehabilitation of a gypsum tailings embankment. Proceedings of the
conference on the Geotechnical Disposal of Solid Waste Materials, Ann Arbor,
MI, 679–714.
Weiguo, S., Mingkai, Z., Qinglin, Z., 2007. Study on lime–ﬂy ash–phosphogypsum
binder. Construction and Building Materials 21 (7), 1480–1485.
Yang, J., Liu, W., Zhang, L., Xiao, B., 2009. Preparation of load-bearing building
materials from autoclaved phosphogypsum. Construction and Building Mate-
rials 23, 687–693.
Zielinski, M., Cyrkiewicz, M. Method for producing gypsum from waste phospho-
gypsum. Polish patent No. PL 163643 B1, 1994.
H. Tayibi et al. / Journal of Environmental Management 90 (2009) 2377–2386
2386
